Explanation of choice to model Nextstrain clades (#266)
reichlab/variant-nowcast-hub: README.md

Each week the hub designates up to nine NextStrain clades with the highest reported prevalence of at least 1% across the US in any of the three complete [USA/CDC epidemiological weeks](https://ndc.services.cdc.gov/wp-content/uploads/MMWR_Week_overview.pdf) (a.k.a. MMWR weeks) preceding the Wednesday submission date. Any clades with prevalence of less than 1% are grouped into an “other” category for which predictions of combined prevalence are also collected. No more than 10 clades (including “other”) are selected in a given week. For details on the workflow that generates this list each week, see the [clade list section](#clade-list) below.

#### Why use Nextstrain clades?

To designate, weekly, a list of variants to model, it is ideal to have a system that does not require human intervention.

> Further, this system must consistently produce a reasonable number of variants to permit the submission of [samples](#probabilistic-forecast-evaluation) of the frequency of every variant in each state for [six weeks](#prediction-horizon).

Author: Fair enough, re, ordering, and I do like the explanation of why algorithmic is good.

> To designate, weekly, a list of variants to model, it is ideal to have a system that does not require human intervention.
> Further, this system must consistently produce a reasonable number of variants to permit the submission of [samples](#probabilistic-forecast-evaluation) of the frequency of every variant in each state for [six weeks](#prediction-horizon).

Author: Maybe, accounting for this and the size bit, we get this?
```suggestion
The Hub must define a list of variants to model each week.
This system should consistently produce a reasonable number of distinct variants as modeling targets.
(Experimentation showed this to be approximately 10 variants or fewer in order to accommodate a sufficient number of [samples](#probabilistic-forecast-evaluation) of the frequency of every variant in each state for [six weeks](#prediction-horizon).)
Ideally, it should be algorithmic and operate without human intervention.
An algorithmic approach makes the choice of targets more transparent and simplifies Hub administration.
```

> Further, this system must consistently produce a reasonable number of variants to permit the submission of [samples](#probabilistic-forecast-evaluation) of the frequency of every variant in each state for [six weeks](#prediction-horizon).

Reviewer: I like the suggested text from @afmagee42 .

> Further, this system must consistently produce a reasonable number of variants to permit the submission of [samples](#probabilistic-forecast-evaluation) of the frequency of every variant in each state for [six weeks](#prediction-horizon).

Reviewer 2: Me too. I think let's go with that!

> Further, this system must consistently produce a reasonable number of modeling units to permit the submission of [samples](#probabilistic-forecast-evaluation) of the frequency of every modeling unit in each state for [six weeks](#prediction-horizon).

Reviewer: I think you are using "modeling unit" to describe the variant/lineage/clade thing, but I find it hard to parse. (And in the first sentence the term "modeling target" is used.) What if we replaced "modeling unit" here, and below on line 102, with "variant". We could offer a mea culpa for that being an imprecise biological term if it makes us feel less squeamish about it.

Author: I am fine with "variant" if you think it's clearer.

[Nextstrain clades](https://nextstrain.org/blog/2021-01-06-updated-SARS-CoV-2-clade-naming) satisfy both requirements readily.

> They intentionally follow larger-scale trends in SARS-CoV-2 evolution, and a suitably-sized selection of relevant clades can be obtained with a simple frequency cutoff.

Author: I think "relevant" is doing some important work here. It's very easy to define a bad set of Pango lineages for modeling, and not straightforward to define a useful set. But even with NextStrain clades, I could pretty easily define a _bad_ set of clades (plus other), say, take the first-named 9 (19 A-B, 20A-H), producing nearly 100% other.

It is incredibly convenient that NextStrain clades allow us to only ever think about the most-specific names available to any sequence, and then take the most frequent ones, and model those.

> They intentionally follow larger-scale trends in SARS-CoV-2 evolution, and a suitably-sized selection of relevant clades can be obtained with a simple frequency cutoff.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good.

> The somewhat more commonly-encountered [Pango lineages](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41564-020-0770-5) describe variation at a much finer scale, and the selection of a suitable number of relevant variants is non-trivial.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps give an example here?  
```suggestion
[Pango lineages](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41564-020-0770-5) are another approach to naming SARS-CoV-2 variants. By design, they describe both coarse-scale and fine-scale virus evolution. Selecting an appropriate set of non-overlapping Pango lineages is less straightforward, as it requires first determining an appropriate scale of variation for modeling.
```

Author: I know I'm doing a lot of hand-waving here, but as mentioned above, we don't want to require an entire explainer of lineage aggregation just to make this point.

To that end, I'm also:
- Iffy on diving into the lower-and-higher-order nature of naming schemes. Nested names are messy, but both Nextstrain clades and Pango lineages do it.
- Not sold on "non-overlapping" because when you read lists of aggregated Pango lineages, or our list of clades to model, implicit paraphyly is pretty much guaranteed (and it is _implicit_).

Reviewer: I don't have strong feelings about the language here. I'd be ok keeping the existing text (not taking @dylanhmorris 's suggestion), because it feels shorter/simpler.

Reviewer 2: Alternative suggestion that stays closer to the existing text but avoids what I think are some potential pitfalls.
```suggestion
[Pango lineages](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41564-020-0770-5) are another approach to naming SARS-CoV-2 variants. By design, they describe both coarse-scale and fine-scale virus evolution. Selecting of a suitable number of relevant variants for nowcasting and forecasting is not straightforward.
```

Reviewer 2: Rationale: I'd like to avoid "non-trivial" and to avoid giving the impression that Pango doesn't do coarse-scale.

Author: This is a good compromise.

> Further, as both systems are inherently phylogenetic, there is [sufficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nextstrain/ncov-clades-schema/master/clades.svg) correspondence [between them](https://next.nextstrain.org/nextclade/sars-cov-2) that it is possible to model Nextstrain clades but discuss results in terms of Pango lineages.

Reviewer: Maybe worth adding on parenthetically at the end of this sentence something like ", even if there is not always a perfect one-to-one alignment between the clade and lineage assignments for a single sequence."

Author: I like this in principle, but I'm having some trouble seeing how to be handwavy enough here not to open up a(t least one) rather large can of worms requiring potentially a fair bit more text to explain.

In a perfect world there would be a many-to-one mapping such that every Pango lineage corresponds to exactly one Nextstrain clade (not a one-to-one mapping). But that quickly leads to the cans of worms that are nestedness of naming (which is why the perfect world is many-to-one) and "lineage assignments aren't data" (which is why we don't live in a perfect world), and if we're not careful the pain that is the [ARG](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10796009/).

Author: Perhaps something like one of these? (Which add load-bearing phrases to accompany the heavy lifting done by "sufficient correspondence.")

1. Further, as both systems are inherently phylogenetic, there is [sufficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nextstrain/ncov-clades-schema/master/clades.svg) correspondence [between them](https://next.nextstrain.org/nextclade/sars-cov-2) that it is broadly possible to model Nextstrain clades but discuss results in terms of Pango lineages (even if, at the level of the assignment of individual sequences, the correspondence appears somewhat murkier).
2. Further, as both systems are inherently phylogenetic, there is [sufficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nextstrain/ncov-clades-schema/master/clades.svg) correspondence [between them](https://next.nextstrain.org/nextclade/sars-cov-2) that it is broadly possible to model Nextstrain clades but discuss results in terms of Pango lineages (even if the mappings are not perfectly clean when looking at sequence-level assignments of clades and lineages).

Reviewer 2: I suggested just adding "typically possible", which I think captures it. The point about single-sequence-level classification is helpful context, but I'd suggest relegating it to a footnote.

Author: I like "typically possible" and I like that a footnote affords a bit more space for clarity in this aside. I have done so.

> Further, as both systems are inherently phylogenetic, there is [sufficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nextstrain/ncov-clades-schema/master/clades.svg) correspondence [between them](https://next.nextstrain.org/nextclade/sars-cov-2) that it is possible to model Nextstrain clades but [discuss results in terms of Pango lineages](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/master/defaults/clade_display_names.yml).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That said, as both systems are inherently phylogenetic, there is typically [sufficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nextstrain/ncov-clades-schema/master/clades.svg) correspondence [between them](https://next.nextstrain.org/nextclade/sars-cov-2) that it is possible to model Nextstrain clades but [discuss results in terms of Pango lineages](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/master/defaults/clade_display_names.yml).
```

> For example, Nextstrain clade 24A corresponds to Pango lineage JN.1, 22F to XBB, and 21L to BA.2.

Reviewer: We could explicitly point to [this file](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/master/defaults/clade_display_names.yml)?

> For these reasons, we have chosen to use Nextstrain clades for defining variants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For these reasons, we have chosen to use Nextstrain clades as our target units for nowcasting and forecasting.
```

Author: I think we can just leave this off, with the changed sentence above, and end with the "they're comparable enough" sentences.
